---
permalink: /dln/
title: "Digital Literacy Narrative"
author_profile: false
---

## Reflections on Digital Literacy

When I first joined the class Introduction to Digital Humanities, I wasn’t quite sure of what to expect. I had a vague idea of what digital humanities referred to, using different tools and computational methods to explore a variety of subjects within the humanities, and I thought that this would be an interesting and complementary class to take in my pursuit of a Computer Science degree. Prior to joining the class, I believed that I was pretty digitally literate; after all, it is an essential skill for a computer scientist. Nonetheless, as the semester progressed, I found myself learning new concepts and tools that I had previously been unaware of. I find digital literacy to be a vague term that can be interpreted in many different ways. For instance, a few decades ago, when modern computer technologies were first being developed, the scope that digital literacy covered at that time was undoubtedly a lot narrower than it is today. With the introduction of new technologies, such as artificial intelligence, quantum computing, and data analysis, the scope for digital literacy has vastly expanded. I believe that no single individual can be entirely digitally literate, given the vast field that technology has grown into. Therefore, we must define our own constraints on what scope of digital literacy we are attempting to navigate. As a 20-year-old university student at a liberal arts institution, I have yet to determine this scope for myself, and partaking in classes such as Introduction to Digital Humanities serves a vital purpose in helping me expand my knowledge on the wide variety of opportunities we may encounter in the modern digital age. As the semester came to an end, I found myself looking back and wondering about how the various tools we have used could be helpful to me in the future.

## Digital Literacy in Content Creation and Social Interaction

Digital literacy has become a vital part of modern content creation and social interaction, with applications in nearly every field imaginable. For instance, as a computer science major, digital literacy is essential for me to have an understanding of modern technologies, their applications, and industry tools. The industry standards heavily dictate what digital literacy means for a specific field. For instance, knowing how to utilize tools such as git and GitHub, knowing the different frameworks available, and having a general understanding of industry tools are a must. Similar observations can be seen in other fields. For instance, Film majors are not usually required to know a programming language to be considered to have good digital literacy. Instead, they must be proficient in their industry tools, such as professional video editing software, e.g., Adobe Premiere Pro or DaVinci Resolve. This pattern clearly demonstrates the different types of digital literacy an individual might possess. Nonetheless, there exists a more general type of digital literacy, one that is primarily responsible for social interactions and an overall ability to use basic technological features. For instance, there exists a variety of different tools and applications for communication, such as Google Chat / Gmail, Slack, Discord, Telegram, WhatsApp, and many more. Communication-based tools, social media applications, public version control systems, and many other platforms exist to provide individuals with the ability to interact digitally, share their work and ideas, and bring new knowledge and perspectives without the limitation of geography.

## Digital Research and Data Management

One way or another, most of our modern research is, in fact, a type of digital research. In the 21st century, we rely on digital tools to help us gather data, access information, publish our findings, uncover patterns, solve problems, and many more things. Working on our second assignment this semester, we worked with “analog data” in the form of the historical Zanzibar Gazette. Through this exploration, I explored the complexities and challenges that come with the translation from analog to digital. While it might be simple for an individual to scan and convert such sources into a digital medium, knowing how to efficiently and effectively extract data into a different format is often the key to proper research. We explored tools such as [Transkribus](https://www.transkribus.org/) for extracting data, and other tools like [KeplerGL](https://kepler.gl/), which can visualize complex data, providing us with new perspectives. Managing and analyzing data is an essential component of digital literacy. I rely on git for version control in my coding projects, refer to Stack Overflow for solutions, and so on. With artificial intelligence emerging so rapidly in the past couple of years, data management has become a crucial aspect of digital literacy that, unfortunately, not many individuals know about. It is crucial for us to understand how to use these tools efficiently and navigate them safely. In this course, I also further developed my understanding of privacy concerns regarding data. An article we read by [Dominic Bayley](https://www.pcworld.com/article/2535401/never-say-these-things-to-chatgpt-it-could-come-back-to-bite-you.html) highlights these critical factors that we need to consider when using AI tools. Ultimately, knowing how to navigate modern tools with regard to the privacy of your personal data has become a key part of modern digital literacy, but is unfortunately often avoided by many with the appeal of free usage.

## Digital Humanities and New Horizons in Learning

Diving further into the field of digital humanities, I have learned a variety of new tools and techniques that I can apply not only within the classroom but also for my future research and development. For instance, during the textual data analysis segment of the course, I had the ability to explore a new type of technique called distant reading. Prior to this, I had only assumed that textual analysis relied on close readings, yet through this new perspective, I learned a new approach. With the help of Johanna Drucker’s [Coursebook](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/mono/10.4324/9781003106531/digital-humanities-coursebook-johanna-drucker), I learned more about data mining and analysis, as well as the importance of other key components such as presentation formats and their effects on how information is perceived. I learned to use tools such as [Voyant Tools](https://voyant-tools.org/) and an RMarkdown notebook with [posit.cloud](https://posit.cloud/), which enabled collaboration and textual analysis from a new perspective, such as working with a large corpus of texts. Naturally, this being my first experience with such tools, I found myself struggling at times to understand how they work and what their purpose is. However, through trial and error and personal exploration, I was able to expand upon my digital literacy and understand the potential that such tools had to offer.

Furthermore, in the final section of the class, I learned about distant viewing. Similar to distant reading, with distant viewing, we explored how specific computer algorithms could cluster, classify, and analyze visual data in the form of images. As a computer science student, I was fascinated to learn about how such techniques are actually valuable within the humanities. For instance, I really enjoyed reading about the analysis of how color is used for advertising in movie posters and genres, from Arnold’s and Tilton’s book, [Distant Viewing: Computational Exploration of Digital Images](https://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/5674/Distant-ViewingComputational-Exploration-of). This actually inspired me to focus my final assignment on analyzing video game cover art. In all, I have learnt that digital humanity is a vast field with a lot of different subsets within it. From visual analysis to textual and geospatial encodings and mappings. There are countless possibilities within this field, and it is highly inspiring to be able to tinker with the basics.

## Conclusion and Future Growth

As the semester comes to an end, I believe that despite finishing the course, there are still so many tools and explorations that we can do outside of class, for our own purposes. Nonetheless, I found the material and structure to be highly intuitive, leading me from fairly introductory concepts of textual analysis to visual and multimodal analysis. Finding intersections between fields, such as digital humanities, is to computer science and the humanities, is a fascinating approach to how we utilize data, curate our research, and so much more. Computational thinking, as examined by Berry and Fagerjord, is not simply thinking like a computer but a cognitive practice involving practical wisdom and reflection on computation. Digital literacy is not a static skill set but an evolving practice that requires constant learning and adaptation and, in truth, can never be fully attained. Nonetheless, we define what digital literacy is for us, and it is essential to realize that, at times, knowing everything is not as crucial as knowing less but at a much higher quality. As a university student, I will continue to explore the sea of knowledge and tools that the modern digital age has to offer, expanding my digital literacy and cultivating digital fluency where it is needed. With a liberal arts education, I feel that my ability to do so is strongly supported. With the new skills and, more importantly, new perspectives that I have learned in this class, I am more prepared to learn new tools without fear of them being overwhelming. I believe that I am now more capable of seeing different perspectives of data as a whole rather than a collection of individual pieces. Ultimately, it is certain that I have expanded my digital literacy knowledge.
